<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" property="http://scholarly-html.org/schtml">



<head xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink"><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Reproducing Autonomy</title>
  
  <meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />
  
  
  

    <link href="../styles/ebook.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" /></head>
    <body>
      <section id="d3012e56"> 
        <h1 id="d3012e58" class="colophon">Colophon</h1> 
        <p class="copyright stb">Anti copyright © Mute Publishing 2016</p> 
        <p class="copyright stb">All content is copyright Mute Publishing, the authors and artists’. However, Mute encourages the use of its contents for purposes that are non-commercial, critical or disruptive of capitalist property relations. Please make sure you credit the author/artist and Mute as the original publishers.<br clear="none" /> This legend is devised in the absence of a licence which adequately represents the contributors, editors and publishers’ respective position on copyright, and to acknowledge but deny the copyrighting performed by default where copyright is waived.<br clear="none" /> Please email services@metamute.org with any details of republication.</p> 
        <p class="stb copyright">Mute Publishing - London | Berlin<br clear="none" /> <a href="http://metamute.org/">http://metamute.org</a> | <a href="https://twitter.com/mutemagazine">@MuteMagazine</a> | <a href="mailto:simon@metamute.org">simon@metamute.org</a><br clear="none" /> Mute Books is an imprint of Mute Publishing<br clear="none" /> ISBN paperback: 978-1-906496-99-9<br clear="none" /> ISBN hardback: 978-1-906496-62-3<br clear="none" /> ISBN eBook: 978-1-906496-63-0</p> 
        <p class="stb copyright">Free to download in a variety of digital formats and also available in print through pay channels <a href="http://metamute.org/editorial/books/reproducing_autonomy">http://metamute.org/editorial/books/reproducing_autonomy</a><br clear="none" /> Distribution Anagram Books <a href="http://www.anagrambooks.com/">http://www.anagrambooks.com/</a><br clear="none" /> <strong>Editorial advisor</strong> English edition Anthony Iles<br clear="none" /> <strong>Publishing Management</strong> Simon Worthington<br clear="none" /> <strong>Layout and digital production</strong> Hybrid Publishing Group <a href="https://hpg.io/">https://hpg.io</a></p> 
        <p class="stb copyright"><strong>Cover Image</strong> Johannes Paul Raether, <em>ResearchAvatara Species Transformellae 4.4.5.1: Insomation of The</em> Totipotential <em>CryoCommunisat,</em> Performance, Fridericianum Kassel, 25 June 2015, Photograph by Holger Jenss.</p> 
        <h3>Acknowledgements</h3> 
        <p class="copyright">Thanks are due to Jenny Nachtigall, whose translation of the text into German for textem (Hamburg) proved a vital source of its sharpening and discussion in both languages and thank you to Johannes Paul Raether, who not only provided us with our cover image but also read and discussed earlier drafts of this volume. Thanks are also due to Danny Hayward and Anthony Iles for tireless, incisive proofreading and editorial dialogue, and to <span id="link-1" class="anchor"></span>Halle für Kunst Lüneburg (Stefanie Kleefeld, Valérie Knoll and Hannes Loichinger) for commissioning the project and ongoing support, and to all who have hosted iterations of aspects of this work-in-process in public over the last few years.</p> 
        <p class="stb copyright">The German-language edition will be published by Textem in 2017. <a href="http://www.textem.de/index.php?id=verlag">http://www.textem.de/index.php?id=verlag</a></p> 
      </section></body>

</html>